So how much do we know about what’s inside the Earth? Very little. Scientists are
generally agreed that the world beneath us is composed of four layers—rocky outer crust, a
mantle of hot, viscous rock, a liquid outer core, and a solid inner core.

We know that the surface is dominated by silicates, which are relatively light and not heavy enough to account for the planet’s overall density. Therefore there must be heavier stuff inside. We know that to generate our magnetic field somewhere in the interior there must be a concentrated belt of metallic elements in a liquid state. That much is universally agreed upon. Almost everything beyond that—how the layers interact, what causes them to behave in the way they do, what they will do at any time in the future—is a matter of at least some uncertainty, and generally quite a lot of uncertainty. Even the one part of it we can see, the crust, is a matter of some fairly strident debate. Nearly all geology texts tell you that continental crust is three to six miles thick under the oceans, about twenty-five miles thick under the continents, and forty to sixty miles thick under big mountain chains, but there are many puzzling variabilities within these generalizations. The crust beneath the Sierra Nevada Mountains, for instance, is only about nineteen to twenty-five miles thick, and no one knows why. By all the laws of geophysics the Sierra Nevadas should be sinking, as if into quicksand. (Some people think they may be.)

The Yellowstone eruption of two million years ago put out enough ash to bury New York
State to a depth of sixty-seven feet or California to a depth of twenty. This was the ash that
made Mike Voorhies’s fossil beds in eastern Nebraska. That blast occurred in what is now
Idaho, but over millions of years, at a rate of about one inch a year, the Earth’s crust has
traveled over it, so that today it is directly under northwest Wyoming. (The hot spot itself
stays in one place, like an acetylene torch aimed at a ceiling.) In its wake it leaves the sort of
rich volcanic plains that are ideal for growing potatoes, as Idaho’s farmers long ago
discovered. In another two million years, geologists like to joke, Yellowstone will be
producing French fries for McDonald’s, and the people of Billings, Montana, will be stepping
around geysers.

The ash fall from the last Yellowstone eruption covered all or parts of nineteen western
states (plus parts of Canada and Mexico)—nearly the whole of the United States west of the
Mississippi. This, bear in mind, is the breadbasket of America, an area that produces roughly
half the world’s cereals. And ash, it is worth remembering, is not like a big snowfall that will melt in the spring. If you wanted to grow crops again, you would have to find some place to put all the ash. It took thousands of workers eight months to clear 1.8 billion tons of debris from the sixteen acres of the World Trade Center site in New York. Imagine what it would take to clear Kansas.

